## The impact of deep learning in treating disease and developing new treatments

Given the need to make better, faster interventions at the point of care -- incorporating the complex calculus of a patients symptoms, diagnostics, and life history -- there have been many attempts to apply deep learning to patient treatment.
Success in this area could help to enable personalized healthcare or precision medicine [@doi:10.1056/NEJMp1006304; @doi:10.1155/2013/769639].
Earlier, we reviewed approaches for patient categorization.
Here, we examine the potential for better treatment, which broadly, may be divided into methods for improved choices of interventions for patients and those for development of new interventions.

### Clinical decision making

In 1996, Tu [@tag:Tu1996_anns] compared the effectiveness of artificial neural networks and logistic regression, questioning whether these techniques would replace traditional statistical methods for predicting medical outcomes such as myocardial infarction [@tag:Baxt1991_myocardial] or mortality [@tag:Wasson1985_clinical].
He posited that while neural networks have several advantages in representational power, the difficulties in interpretation may limit clinical applications, a limitation that still remains today.
In addition, the challenges faced by physicians parallel those encountered by deep learning.
For a given patient, the number of possible diseases is very large, with a long tail of rare diseases and patients are highly heterogeneous and may present with very different signs and symptoms for the same disease.
Still, in 2006 Lisboa and Taktak [@tag:Lisboa2006_review] examined the use of artificial neural networks in medical journals, concluding that they improved healthcare relative to traditional screening methods in 21 of 27 studies.

While further progress has been made in using deep learning for clinical decision making, it is hindered by a challenge common to many deep learning applications: it is much easier to predict an outcome than to suggest an action to change the outcome.
Several attempts [@tag:Katzman2016_deepsurv;
@tag:Ranganath2016_deep] at recasting the clinical decision-making problem into a prediction problem (i.e. prediction of which treatment will most improve the patient's health) have accurately predicted survival patterns, but technical and medical challenges remain for clinical adoption (similar to those for categorization).
In particular, remaining barriers include actionable interpretability of deep learning models, fitting deep models to limited and heterogeneous data, and integrating complex predictive models into a dynamic clinical environment.

A critical challenge in providing treatment recommendations is identifying a causal relationship for each recommendation.
Causal inference is often framed in terms of counterfactual question [@doi:10.1037/h0037350].
Johansson et al.
[@arxiv:1605.03661] use deep neural networks to create representation models for covariates that capture nonlinear effects and show significant performance improvements over existing models.
In a less formal approach, Kale et al.
[@pmcid:PMC4765623] first create a deep neural network to model clinical time series and then analyze the relationship of the hidden features to the output using a causal approach.

A common challenge for deep learning is the interpretability of the models and their predictions.
The task of clinical decision making is necessarily risk-averse, so model interpretability is key.
Without clear reasoning, it is difficult to establish trust in a model.
As described above, there has been some work to directly assign treatment plans without interpretability; however, the removal of human experts from the decision-making loop make the models difficult to integrate with clinical practice.
To alleviate this challenge, several studies have attempted to create more interpretable deep models, either specifically for healthcare or as a general procedure for deep learning (see Discussion).

#### Predicting patient trajectories

A common application for deep learning in this domain is the temporal structure of healthcare records.
Many studies [@tag:Lipton2016_missing; @tag:Che2016_rnn; @tag:Huddar2016_predicting; @tag:Lipton2015_lstm] have used RNNs to categorize patients, but most stop short of suggesting clinical decisions.
Nemati et al. [@tag:Nemati2016_rl] used deep reinforcement learning to optimize a heparin dosing policy for intensive care patients.
However, because the ideal dosing policy is unknown, the model's predictions must be evaluated on counter-factual data.
This represents a common challenge when bridging the gap between research and clinical practice.
Because the ground-truth is unknown, researchers struggle to evaluate model predictions in the absence of interventional data, but clinical application is unlikely until the model has been shown to be effective.
The impressive applications of deep reinforcement learning to other domains [@tag:Silver2016_alphago] have relied on knowledge of the underlying processes (e.g. the rules of the game).
Some models have been developed for targeted medical problems [@tag:Gultepe2014_sepsis], but a generalized engine is beyond current capabilities.

#### Clinical trial efficiency

A clinical deep learning task that has been more successful is the assignment of patients to clinical trials.
Ithapu et al. [@tag:Ithapu2015_efficient] used a randomized denoising autoencoder to learn a multimodal imaging marker that predicts future cognitive and neural decline from positron emission tomography
(PET), amyloid florbetapir PET, and structural magnetic resonance imaging.
By accurately predicting which cases will progress to dementia, they were able to efficiently assign patients to a clinical trial and reduced the required sample sizes by a factor of five.
Similarly, Artemov et al. [@tag:Artemov2016_clinical] applied deep learning to predict which clinical trials were likely to fail and which were likely to succeed.
By predicting the side effects and pathway activations of each drug and translating these activations to a success probability, their deep learning-based approach was able to significantly outperform a random forest classifier trained on gene expression changes.
These approaches suggest promising directions to improve the efficiency of clinical trials and accelerate drug development.

### Drug repositioning

Drug repositioning (or repurposing) is an attractive option for delivering new drugs to the market because of the high costs and failure rates associated with more traditional drug discovery approaches [@doi:10.1016/j.jhealeco.2016.01.012; @doi:10.1038/nrd4609].
A decade ago, the Connectivity Map [@doi:10.1126/science.1132939] had a sizeable impact.
Reverse matching disease gene expression signatures with a large set of reference compound profiles allowed researchers to formulate repurposing hypotheses at scale using a simple non-parametric test.
Since then, several advanced computational methods have been applied to formulate and validate drug repositioning hypotheses [@doi:10.1093/bib/bbv020; @doi:10.1093/bib/bbw112; @doi:10.1093/bib/bbw110].
Using supervised learning and collaborative filtering to tackle this type of problem is proving successful, especially when coupling disease or compound omic data with topological information from protein-protein or protein-compound interaction networks [@doi:10.1186/1758-2946-5-30; @doi:10.1021/ci500340n; @doi:10.1186/s12859-015-0845-0].

For example, Menden et al. [@doi:10.1371/journal.pone.0061318] used a shallow neural network to predict sensitivity of cancer cell lines to drug treatment using both cell line and drug features, opening the door to precision medicine and drug repositioning opportunities in cancer.
More recently, Aliper et al.
[@doi:10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.6b00248] used gene- and pathway-level drug perturbation transcriptional profiles from the Library of Network-Based Cellular Signatures [@doi:10.3389/fgene.2014.00342] to train a fully connected deep neural network to predict drug therapeutic uses and indications.
By using confusion matrices and leveraging misclassification, the authors formulated a number of interesting hypotheses, including repurposing cardiovascular drugs such as otenzepad and pinacidil for neurological disorders.

Drug repositioning can also be approached by attempting to predict novel drug-target interactions and then repurposing the drug for the associated indication [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005219;
@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005135].
Wang et al. [@doi:10.1109/BIBM.2014.6999129] devised a pairwise input neural network with two hidden layers that takes two inputs, a drug and a target binding site, and predicts whether they interact.
Wang et al. [@doi:10.1093/bioinformatics/btt234] trained individual RBMs for each target in a drug-target interaction network and used these models to predict novel interactions pointing to new indications for existing drugs.
Wen et al. [@doi:10.1021/acs.jproteome.6b00618] extended this concept to deep learning by creating a DBN called DeepDTIs, which predicts interactions using chemical structure and protein sequence features.

Drug repositioning appears an obvious candidate for deep learning both because of the large amount of high-dimensional data available and the complexity of the question being asked.
However, perhaps the most promising piece of work in this space [@doi:10.1021/acs.molpharmaceut.6b00248] is more of a proof of concept than a real-world hypothesis-generation tool; notably, deep learning was used to predict drug indications but not for the actual repositioning.
At present, some of the most popular state-of-the-art methods for signature-based drug repurposing [@doi:10.1038/npjsba.2016.15] do not use predictive modeling.
A mature and production-ready framework for drug repositioning via deep learning is currently missing.

### Drug development

#### Ligand-based prediction of bioactivity

High-throughput chemical screening in biomedical research aims to improve therapeutic options over a long term horizon [@tag:PerezSianes2016_screening].
The objective is to discover which small molecules (also referred to as chemical compounds or ligands) specifically affect the activity of a target, such as a kinase, protein-protein interaction, or broader cellular phenotype.
This screening is often one of the first steps in a long drug discovery pipeline, where novel molecules are pursued for their ability to inhibit or enhance disease-relevant biological mechanisms [@doi:10.1038/nrd1086].
Initial hits are confirmed to eliminate false positives and proceed to the lead generation stage [@doi:10.1016/j.drudis.2006.06.016], where they are evaluated for absorption, distribution, metabolism, excretion, and toxicity (ADMET) and other properties.
It is desirable to advance multiple lead series, clusters of structurally-similar active chemicals, for further optimization by medicinal chemists to protect against unexpected failures in the later stages of drug discovery [@doi:10.1038/nrd1086].

Computational work in this domain aims to identify sufficient candidate active compounds without exhaustively screening libraries of hundreds of thousands or millions of chemicals.
Predicting chemical activity computationally is known as virtual screening.
An ideal algorithm will rank a sufficient number of active compounds before the inactives, but the rankings of actives relative to other actives and inactives are less important [@tag:Swamidass2009_irv].
Computational modeling also has the potential to predict ADMET traits for lead generation [@tag:Kearnes2016_admet] and how drugs are metabolized [@doi:10.1021/ci400518g].

Ligand-based approaches train on chemicals' features without modeling target features (e.g. protein structure).
Neural networks have a long history in this domain [@tag:Baskin2015_drug_disc; @doi:10.1002/minf.201501008], and the 2012 Merck Molecular Activity Challenge on Kaggle generated substantial excitement about the potential for high-parameter deep learning approaches.
The winning submission was an ensemble that included a multi-task multi-layer perceptron network [@tag:Dahl2014_multi_qsar].
The sponsors noted drastic improvements over a random forest baseline, remarking "we have seldom seen any method in the past 10 years that could consistently outperform [random forest] by such a margin" [@tag:Ma2015_qsar_merck], but not all outside experts were convinced [@tag:Lowe2012_kaggle].
Subsequent work (reviewed in more detail by Goh et al. [@doi:10.1002/jcc.24764]) explored the effects of jointly modeling far more targets than the Merck challenge [@tag:Unterthiner2014_screening;
@tag:Ramsundar2015_multitask_drug], with Ramsundar et al.
[@tag:Ramsundar2015_multitask_drug] showing that the benefits of multi-task networks had not yet saturated even with 259 targets.
Although DeepTox [@tag:Mayr2016_deep_tox], a deep learning approach, won another competition, the Toxicology in the 21st Century (Tox21) Data Challenge, it did not dominate alternative methods as thoroughly as in other domains.
DeepTox was the top performer on 9 of 15 targets and highly competitive with the top performer on the others.
However, for many targets there was little separation between the top two or three methods.

The nuanced Tox21 performance may be more reflective of the practical challenges encountered in ligand-based chemical screening than the extreme enthusiasm generated by the Merck competition.
A study of 22 ADMET tasks demonstrated that there are limitations to multi-task transfer learning that are in part a consequence of the degree to which tasks are related [@tag:Kearnes2016_admet].
Some of the ADMET datasets showed superior performance in multi-task models with only 22 ADMET tasks compared to multi-task models with over 500 less-similar tasks.
In addition, the training datasets encountered in practical applications may be tiny relative to what is available in public datasets and organized competitions.
A study of BACE-1 inhibitors included only 1547 compounds [@tag:Subramanian2016_bace1].
Machine learning models were able to train on this limited dataset, but overfitting was a challenge and the differences between random forests and a deep neural network were negligible, especially in the classification setting.
Overfitting is still a problem in larger chemical screening datasets with tens or hundreds of thousands of compounds because the number of active compounds can be very small, on the order of 0.1% of all tested chemicals for a typical target [@doi:10.1002/wcms.1104].
This has motivated low-parameter neural networks that emphasize compound-compound similarity, such as influence-relevance voter [@tag:Swamidass2009_irv; @tag:Lusci2015_irv], instead of predicting compound activity directly from chemical features.

#### Chemical featurization and representation learning

Much of the recent excitement in this domain has come from what could be considered a creative experimentation phase, in which deep learning has offered novel possibilities for feature representation and modeling of chemical compounds.
A molecular graph, where atoms are labeled nodes and bonds are labeled edges, is a natural way to represent a chemical structure.
Chemical features can be represented as a list of molecular descriptors such as molecular weight, atom counts, functional groups, charge representations, summaries of atom-atom relationships in the molecular graph, and more sophisticated derived properties [@doi:10.1002/9783527628766].
Traditional machine learning approaches relied on preprocessing the graph into a feature vector of molecular descriptors or a fixed-width bit vector known as a fingerprint [@tag:Rogers2010_fingerprints].
The same fingerprints have been used by some drug-target interaction methods discussed above [@doi:10.1021/acs.jproteome.6b00618].
An overly simplistic but approximately correct view of chemical fingerprints is that each bit represents the presence or absence of a particular chemical substructure in the molecular graph.
Instead of using molecular descriptors or fingerprints as input, modern neural networks can represent chemicals as textual strings [@tag:Gomezb2016_automatic] or images [@arxiv:1706.06689] or operate directly on the molecular graph, which has enabled strategies for learning novel chemical representations.

Virtual screening and chemical property prediction have emerged as one of the major applications areas for graph-based neural networks.
Duvenaud et al. [@tag:Duvenaud2015_graph_conv] generalized standard circular fingerprints by substituting discrete operations in the fingerprinting algorithm with operations in a neural network, producing a real-valued feature vector instead of a bit vector.
Other approaches offer trainable networks that can learn chemical feature representations that are optimized for a particular prediction task.
Lusci et al. [@tag:Lusci2013_rnn] applied recursive neural networks for directed acyclic graphs to undirected molecular graphs by creating an ensemble of directed graphs in which one atom is selected as the root node.
Graph convolutions on undirected molecular graphs have eliminated the need to enumerate artificially directed graphs, learning feature vectors for atoms that are a function of the properties of neighboring atoms and local regions on the molecular graph [@tag:Kearnes2016_graph_conv; @tag:AltaeTran2016_one_shot; @doi:10.1021/acs.jcim.6b00601].
More sophisticated graph algorithms [@doi:10.1021/acscentsci.7b00405; @arxiv:1801.02144] addressed limitations of standard graph convolutions that primarily operate on each node's local neighborhood.
We anticipate that these graph-based neural networks could also be applicable in other types of biological networks, such as the PPI networks we discussed previously.

Advances in chemical representation learning have also enabled new strategies for learning chemical-chemical similarity functions.
Altae-Tran et al. developed a one-shot learning network [@tag:AltaeTran2016_one_shot] to address the reality that most practical chemical screening studies are unable to provide the thousands or millions of training compounds that are needed to train larger multi-task networks.
Using graph convolutions to featurize chemicals, the network learns an embedding from compounds into a continuous feature space such that compounds with similar activities in a set of training tasks have similar embeddings.
The approach is evaluated in an extremely challenging setting.
The embedding is learned from a subset of prediction tasks (e.g. activity assays for individual proteins), and only one to ten labeled examples are provided as training data on a new task.
On Tox21 targets, even when trained with _one_ task-specific active compound and _one_ inactive compound, the model is able to generalize reasonably well because it has learned an informative embedding function from the related tasks.
Random forests, which cannot take advantage of the related training tasks, trained in the same setting are only slightly better than a random classifier.
Despite the success on Tox21, performance on MUV datasets, which contains assays designed to be challenging for chemical informatics algorithms, is considerably worse.
The authors also demonstrate the limitations of transfer learning as embeddings learned from the Tox21 assays have little utility for a drug adverse reaction dataset.

These novel, learned chemical feature representations may prove to be essential for accurately predicting why some compounds with similar structures yield similar target effects and others produce drastically different results.
Currently, these methods are enticing but do not necessarily outperform classic approaches by a large margin.
The neural fingerprints [@tag:Duvenaud2015_graph_conv] were narrowly beaten by regression using traditional circular fingerprints on a drug efficacy prediction task but were superior for predicting solubility or photovoltaic efficiency.
In the original study, graph convolutions [@tag:Kearnes2016_graph_conv] performed comparably to a multi-task network using standard fingerprints and slightly better than the neural fingerprints [@tag:Duvenaud2015_graph_conv] on the drug efficacy task but were slightly worse than the influence-relevance voter method on an HIV dataset [@tag:Swamidass2009_irv].
Broader recent benchmarking has shown that relative merits of these methods depends on the dataset and cross validation strategy [@tag:Wu2017_molecule_net], though evaluation in this domain often uses auROC (area under the receiver operating characteristic curve) [@doi:10.1007/s10822-008-9170-2], which has limited utility due to the large class imbalance (see Discussion).

We remain optimistic for the potential of deep learning and specifically representation learning in drug discovery.
Rigorous benchmarking on broad and diverse prediction tasks will be as important as novel neural network architectures to advance the state of the art and convincingly demonstrate superiority over traditional cheminformatics techniques.
Fortunately, there has recently been much progress in this direction.
The DeepChem software [@tag:AltaeTran2016_one_shot; @tag:DeepChem] and MoleculeNet benchmarking suite [@tag:Wu2017_molecule_net] built upon it contain chemical bioactivity and toxicity prediction datasets, multiple compound featurization approaches including graph convolutions, and various machine learning algorithms ranging from standard baselines like logistic regression and random forests to recent neural network architectures.
Independent research groups have already contributed additional datasets and prediction algorithms to DeepChem.
Adoption of common benchmarking evaluation metrics, datasets, and baseline algorithms has the potential to establish the practical utility of deep learning in chemical bioactivity prediction and lower the barrier to entry for machine learning researchers without biochemistry expertise.

One open question in ligand-based screening pertains to the benefits and limitations of transfer learning.
Multi-task neural networks have shown the advantages of jointly modeling many targets [@tag:Unterthiner2014_screening;
@tag:Ramsundar2015_multitask_drug].
Other studies have shown the limitations of transfer learning when the prediction tasks are insufficiently related [@tag:Kearnes2016_admet; @tag:AltaeTran2016_one_shot].
This has important implications for representation learning.
The typical approach to improve deep learning models by expanding the dataset size may not be applicable if only
"related" tasks are beneficial, especially because task-task relatedness is ill-defined.
The massive chemical state space will also influence the development of unsupervised representation learning methods [@tag:Gomezb2016_automatic; @doi:10.1021/acs.jcim.7b00616].
Future work will establish whether it is better to train on massive collections of diverse compounds, drug-like small molecules, or specialized subsets.

#### Structure-based prediction of bioactivity

When protein structure is available, virtual screening has traditionally relied on docking programs to predict how a compound best fits in the target's binding site and score the predicted ligand-target complex [@doi:10.1208/s12248-012-9322-0].
Recently, deep learning approaches have been developed to model protein structure, which is expected to improve upon the simpler drug-target interaction algorithms described above that represent proteins with feature vectors derived from amino acid sequences [@doi:10.1109/BIBM.2014.6999129; @doi:10.1021/acs.jproteome.6b00618].

Structure-based deep learning methods differ in whether they use experimentally-derived or predicted ligand-target complexes and how they represent the 3D structure.
The Atomic CNN [@arxiv:1703.10603] and TopologyNet [@doi:10.1371/journal.pcbi.1005690] models take 3D structures from PDBBind [@doi:10.1021/jm048957q] as input, ensuring the ligand-target complexes are reliable.
AtomNet [@tag:Wallach2015_atom_net] samples multiple ligand poses within the target binding site, and DeepVS [@tag:Pereira2016_docking] and Ragoza et al. [@tag:Ragoza2016_protein] use a docking program to generate protein-compound complexes.
If they are sufficiently accurate, these latter approaches would have wider applicability to a much larger set of compounds and proteins.
However, incorrect ligand poses will be misleading during training, and the predictive performance is sensitive to the docking quality [@tag:Pereira2016_docking].

There are two established options for representing a protein-compound complex.
One option, a 3D grid, can featurize the input complex [@tag:Wallach2015_atom_net;
@tag:Ragoza2016_protein].
Each entry in the grid tracks the types of protein and ligand atoms in that region of the 3D space or descriptors derived from those atoms.
Alternatively, DeepVS [@tag:Pereira2016_docking] and atomic convolutions [@arxiv:1703.10603] offer greater flexibility in their convolutions by eschewing the 3D grid.
Instead, they each implement techniques for executing convolutions over atoms' neighboring atoms in the 3D space.
Gomes et al. demonstrate that currently random forest on a 1D feature vector that describes the 3D ligand-target structure generally outperforms neural networks on the same feature vector as well as atomic convolutions and ligand-based neural networks when predicting the continuous-valued inhibition constant on the PDBBind refined dataset [@arxiv:1703.10603].
However, in the long term, atomic convolutions may ultimately overtake grid-based methods, as they provide greater freedom to model atom-atom interactions and the forces that govern binding affinity.

#### *De novo* drug design

*De novo* drug design attempts to model the typical design-synthesize-test cycle of drug discovery [@doi:10.1002/wcms.49; @doi:10.1021/acs.jmedchem.5b01849].
It explores an estimated 10<sup>60</sup> synthesizable organic molecules with drug-like properties without explicit enumeration [@doi:10.1002/wcms.1104].
To test or score structures, algorithms like those discussed earlier are used.
To "design" and "synthesize", traditional *de novo* design software relied on classical optimizers such as genetic algorithms.
Unfortunately, this often leads to overfit, "weird" molecules, which are difficult to synthesize in the lab.
Current programs have settled on rule-based virtual chemical reactions to generate molecular structures [@doi:10.1021/acs.jmedchem.5b01849].
Deep learning models that generate realistic, synthesizable molecules have been proposed as an alternative.
In contrast to the classical, symbolic approaches, generative models learned from data would not depend on laboriously encoded expert knowledge.
The challenge of generating molecules has parallels to the generation of syntactically and semantically correct text [@arxiv:1308.0850].

As deep learning models that directly output (molecular) graphs remain under-explored, generative neural networks for drug design typically represent chemicals with the simplified molecular-input line-entry system (SMILES), a standard string-based representation with characters that represent atoms, bonds, and rings [@tag:Segler2017_drug_design].
This allows treating molecules as sequences and leveraging recent progress in recurrent neural networks.
Gómez-Bombarelli et al. designed a SMILES-to-SMILES autoencoder to learn a continuous latent feature space for chemicals [@tag:Gomezb2016_automatic].
In this learned continuous space it was possible to interpolate between continuous representations of chemicals in a manner that is not possible with discrete
(e.g. bit vector or string) features or in symbolic, molecular graph space.
Even more interesting is the prospect of performing gradient-based or Bayesian optimization of molecules within this latent space.
The strategy of constructing simple, continuous features before applying supervised learning techniques is reminiscent of autoencoders trained on high-dimensional EHR data [@tag:BeaulieuJones2016_ehr_encode].
A drawback of the SMILES-to-SMILES autoencoder is that not all SMILES strings produced by the autoencoder's decoder correspond to valid chemical structures.
Recently, the Grammar Variational Autoencoder, which takes the SMILES grammar into account and is guaranteed to produce syntactically valid SMILES, has been proposed to alleviate this issue [@arxiv:1703.01925].

Another approach to *de novo* design is to train character-based RNNs on large collections of molecules, for example, ChEMBL [@doi:10.1093/nar/gkr777], to first obtain a generic generative model for drug-like compounds [@tag:Segler2017_drug_design].
These generative models successfully learn the grammar of compound representations, with 94% [@tag:Olivecrona2017_drug_design] or nearly 98% [@tag:Segler2017_drug_design] of generated SMILES corresponding to valid molecular structures.
The initial RNN is then fine-tuned to generate molecules that are likely to be active against a specific target by either continuing training on a small set of positive examples [@tag:Segler2017_drug_design] or adopting reinforcement learning strategies [@tag:Olivecrona2017_drug_design; @arxiv:1611.02796].
Both the fine-tuning and reinforcement learning approaches can rediscover known, held-out active molecules.
The great flexibility of neural networks, and progress in generative models offers many opportunities for deep architectures in *de novo* design (e.g. the adaptation of GANs for molecules).
