## Abstract

<<<<<<< HEAD
Deep learning, a new class of machine learning algorithms, has recently showed
impressive results across a variety domains. Biomedicine and genomics, both
data- and feature-rich and yet complex and ill-understood, presents an obvious
target for applying this new approach. We examine applications of deep learning
to a variety of biomedical data problems - in patient classification,
fundamental research and patient treatment -  to determine if similar progress
can be made here or what unique challenges the biomedical sphere holds. We find
that while deep learning has achieved (sometimes remarkable) advances on prior
state-of-the-art methods, it has not yet revolutionized or definitively solved
any problem. In some cases, this is probably simply a matter of time but
elsewhere technical advances need to be made in the areas of interpretability,
unsupervised learning and most generally how to best model a problem. Beyond the
technical, the limited amount of (correctly labeled) data available for traing
presents problems, as does the legal and privacy constraints enforced by working
with health records. Nonetheless, we forsee a growing use of deep learning with
potential for transforming some fields of biomedicine.
=======
Deep learning, a class of machine learning algorithms, has recently showed
impressive results across a variety of domains. Biomedicine and genomics, both
data- and feature-rich and yet complex and often ill-understood, present an
obvious and potentially valuable target for this new approach. We examine
applications of deep learning to a variety of biomedical problems --
classification, fundamental research into biology and patient treatment -- to
determine if similar progress can be made there or if the biomedical sphere
holds unique challenges. While deep learning has yet to revolutionize or
definitively resolve any of these problems, promising (sometimes remarkable)
advances have been made on the prior state-of-the-art. Even where improvement
over the previous baseline has been modest, there is still the promise of
greatly speeding or aiding human investigation. More work is needed in technical
directions such as interpretability and how to best model a problem. Further,
the limited amount of labeled data for training presents problems in some
domains, as can the legal and privacy constraints enforced by working with
sensitive health records. Nonetheless, we foresee a growing use of deep learning
with potential for transforming several fields of biomedicine, coming to routine
use at the bench and bedside.
>>>>>>> upstream/master
